Add a page for foreign data wrappers (#3532)
timescale/docs: use-timescale/schema-management/foreign-data-wrappers.md

---
title: Foreign data wrappers
excerpt: Query PostgreSQL databases within or outside Timescale
products: [cloud, mst, self_hosted]
keywords: [hypertables, schemas, alter]
tags: [change]
---

# Foreign data wrappers

You use foreign data wrappers (FDWs) to query external data sources from a Timescale Cloud service. These data sources can be one of the following:

- Other Timescale Cloud services.
- PostgreSQL databases outside of Timescale Cloud.

If you are using [VPC peering][vpc-peering], you can create FDWs in your Customer VPC for a service in Timescale VPC or the same project. However, you can't create FDWs from Timescale VPC to Customer VPC.

FDWs are particularly useful if you manage multiple different Timescale Cloud service types, and need to seamlessly access and merge regular and time-series data.

## Query another data source

You create FDWs with the `postgres_fdw` extension, which is enabled by default. 

<Procedure>

To query another data source, run the following queries in the [SQL editor][sql-editor]:

1. **Create a server:**

   ```sql
   CREATE SERVER <server-name> 
   FOREIGN DATA WRAPPER postgres_fdw 

>    OPTIONS (host '<service-ID>.<project-id>.tsdb.cloud.timescale.com', dbname '<database-name>', port '<port-number>');

Reviewer: Sorry, some last minute comments: `<service-ID>.<project-id>.tsdb.cloud.timescale.com` is correct if another DB is in Timescale Cloud, but can be any valid hostname (or an IPv4 address) otherwise.

   ```

1. **Create user mapping:**

   ```sql
   CREATE USER MAPPING FOR <tsdbadmin> 
   SERVER <server-name> 
   OPTIONS (user '<tsdbadmin>', password '<tsdbadmin-password>');
   ```

1. **Import a foreign schema (recommended) or create a foreign table:**

    - Import the whole schema:

      ```sql
      CREATE SCHEMA <schema-name>;
      IMPORT FOREIGN SCHEMA <foreign-schema-name> 
      FROM SERVER <server-name> 
      INTO <schema-name>;
      ```
      
    - Alternatively, import a limited number of tables: 

      ```sql
      CREATE SCHEMA <schema-name>;
      IMPORT FOREIGN SCHEMA <foreign-schema-name> 

>       LIMIT TO (table1, table2) 

Reviewer: Placeholder: `<table1>, <table2>`

---
title: Foreign data wrappers
excerpt: Query PostgreSQL databases within or outside Timescale
products: [cloud, mst, self_hosted]
keywords: [hypertables, schemas, alter]
tags: [change]
---

# Foreign data wrappers

> You use foreign data wrappers (FDWs) to query other PostgreSQL databases in a direct, secure, and efficient manner. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You use foreign data wrappers (FDWs) to to access data stored in  Timescale Cloud services or PostgreSQL databases from a source Timescale Cloud service in a direct, secure, and efficient manner. 
```

Reviewer: typo "to to access"

Author: @billy-the-fish this becomes unreadable as a sentence, that's why it's in bullets now.

> These other databases can be located:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These other data sources can be located:
```

Author: Rewrote the whole bit

> - Within the same Timescale project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Within the same project in Timescale Cloud.
```

> - Outside of Timescale completely.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Outside of  Timescale Cloud completely.
```

> Cross-project queries are not supported for security reasons. If using VPC, only services within your VPC can connect.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For security reasons, cross-project queries are not supported. If you are using a VPC Peering, you can only connect to services within your VPC.
```

Link to https://docs.timescale.com/use-timescale/latest/vpc/ for vpc peering. I'm not too sure about htis.

Reviewer: Cross-project queries for public services are supported, but I don't think we need to mention it explicitly.
For databases in VPC, it's more involved: a customer can connect to their Timescale Cloud DB in VPC from their side of the VPC or from the same Timescale Cloud project. The VPC DB cannot initiate a connection to the customer's side of VPC, though.

> FDWs are particularly useful if you manage multiple PostgreSQL and time-series instances and need seamless access to both standard and time-series data.

Reviewer 2: ... multiple different Timescale Cloud service types, and need to seemly access regular and time-series data.

Reviewer: In addition:
FDWs are useful to join data across multiple data sources

Author: Rephrased to address both comments

<Procedure>

> ## Query another Timescale database 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Query another Timescale Cloud service 
```

> To query another Timescale database in the same project, take the following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To query a service in the same project, do the following:
```

1. Enable the FDW extension:

>     1. In Timescale Console, select the service and enter the ops mode. 

Reviewer 2: Link to console

You are in ops mode by default

Reviewer: there's no need to enable it explicitly. It's installed for everyone by default

    1. Navigate to `Operations` > `Extensions` and find `postgres_fdw` in the list. 

>     1. Expand the section underneath and either click `Run` to install, or copy and run the code in the SQL editor. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    1. To enable FDW, expand the section underneath and and click `Run`.
 
          You can also copy this code and run it in SQL editor. 
```

Author: Removed this step as it was unnecessary

1. Create a foreign data wrapper. 

>    A user with the `tsdbadmin` role assigned already has the required `USAGE` permission to create FDWs.

Reviewer 2: If you are logged into Console you already have this permission, I would change to:

Configure the following SQL queries for the services you want to link to, then run them in [SQL editor](link to https://docs.timescale.com/getting-started/latest/run-queries-from-console/#ops-mode-sql-editor)

    1. Create a server:

       ```sql
       CREATE SERVER <server-name> FOREIGN DATA WRAPPER postgres_fdw OPTIONS (host '<service-ID>.<project-id>.tsdb.cloud.timescale.com', dbname '<database-name>', port '<port-number>');
       ```

    1. Create user mapping:

       ```sql

>        CREATE USER MAPPING FOR <tsdbadmin-user-name> SERVER <server-name> OPTIONS (user '<tsdbadmin-user-name>', password '<tsdbadmin-user-password>');

Reviewer: <tsdbadmin-user-name> should be just `tsdbadmin`. It's fixed on Cloud and unlikely to change

       ```

    1. Import a foreign schema (recommended) or create a foreign table:

        - Import the whole schema:

          ```sql
          CREATE SCHEMA <schema-name>;
          IMPORT FOREIGN SCHEMA <foreign-schema-name> FROM SERVER <server-name> INTO <schema-name>;
          ```
          
        - Alternatively, import a limited number of tables: 

          ```sql
          CREATE SCHEMA <schema-name>;
          IMPORT FOREIGN SCHEMA <foreign-schema-name> LIMIT TO (table1, table2) FROM SERVER <server-name> INTO <schema-name>;
          ```

>         - Create a foreign table: 

Reviewer: This is an alternative to schema import. So skip if a user did the previous step

Author: This is specified in the step :-)

          ```sql

>           CREATE FOREIGN TABLE <table-name> (

Reviewer: This was an example from Postgres docs. If we're making table name a placeholder, the column names should also be placeholders

Author: Could you please shorten/fix this one, so that it uses placeholders, where needed?

keywords: [hypertables, schemas, alter]
tags: [change]
---

# Foreign data wrappers

You use foreign data wrappers (FDWs) to query external data sources from a Timescale Cloud service. These data sources can be one of the following:

- Other Timescale Cloud services.
- PostgreSQL databases outside of Timescale Cloud.

If you are using [VPC peering][vpc-peering], you can create FDWs in your Customer VPC for a service in Timescale VPC or the same project. However, you can't create FDWs from Timescale VPC to Customer VPC.

FDWs are particularly useful if you manage multiple different Timescale Cloud service types, and need to seamlessly access and merge regular and time-series data.

## Query another data source

You create FDWs with the help of the `postgres_fdw` extension, which is enabled by default. 

<Procedure>

To query another data source, run the following queries in the [SQL editor][sql-editor]:

1. Create a server:

   ```sql
   CREATE SERVER <server-name> FOREIGN DATA WRAPPER postgres_fdw OPTIONS (host '<service-ID>.<project-id>.tsdb.cloud.timescale.com', dbname '<database-name>', port '<port-number>');
   ```

1. Create user mapping:

   ```sql

>    CREATE USER MAPPING FOR <tsdbadmin> SERVER <server-name> OPTIONS (user '<tsdbadmin>', password '<tsdbadmin-password>');

Reviewer: Should be `tsdbadmin` without a placeholder in this example

   ```

1. Import a foreign schema (recommended) or create a foreign table:

    - Import the whole schema:

      ```sql
      CREATE SCHEMA <schema-name>;
      IMPORT FOREIGN SCHEMA <foreign-schema-name> FROM SERVER <server-name> INTO <schema-name>;
      ```
      
    - Alternatively, import a limited number of tables: 

      ```sql
      CREATE SCHEMA <schema-name>;
      IMPORT FOREIGN SCHEMA <foreign-schema-name> LIMIT TO (table1, table2) FROM SERVER <server-name> INTO <schema-name>;
      ```

    - Create a foreign table: 

      ```sql
      CREATE FOREIGN TABLE <table-name> (

>       code        char(5) NOT NULL,

Reviewer: Assuming a user has a table defined like this:

```
create table metric(recorded timestamptz not null, temp float, device text);
```

A corresponding foreign table will look like:

```
CREATE FOREIGN TABLE metric (
recorded timestamptz NOT NULL,
temp float,
device text
) SERVER <server-name>;
```

I would still prefer to explicitly mention it's an alternative to import, because a lot of users just copy all commands to console directly without contemplating :smiling_face_with_tear:

Author: @inchuev 1) This is more of an example, and all other commands use placeholders. Would it be correct to modify like this:

```
CREATE FOREIGN TABLE <table-name> (
<column-1-name> <data-type> <optional-constraint>,
...
<column-n-name> <data-type> <optional-constraint>
) SERVER <server-name>;
```
?

2) Makes sense about direct copying. Added the note about skipping, thank you.

Reviewer: Yes, this is correct.
